## 14.3.	  Contextualization of learning about the universe.

Three elements characterize contextualization of learning: the proposition of a problematic situation, the elaboration of generating questions, and the description of learning and evaluation activities to answer those questions. In this section que apply this process to analyze Peebles´s Nobel Lecture *How Physical Cosmology Grew.*

The problematic situation is the conceptual description of the Nobel Lecture focused on the explanation of what cosmological knowledge is. The knowledge communicated by Peebles in his Lecture is artificially breakdown in terms of answers to the following questions:  What are three of the main issues that describe the research life of James Peebles?, What is the cosmic microwave background radiation? and What is dark matter? Afterwards, for closing the contextualization procedure, we propose as possible answers to previous questions different paragraphs of the Lecture conceptual structure.

Cosmological knowledge has been created by organizing what has been *seen* through specific windows for watching and registering celestial objects: first through the human eye and optical telescopes and afterwards with the support of systems of modern telescopes on earth or in satellites external to the terrestrial atmosphere. Three steps characterize the evolution of cosmology:
 
(1)	According to astrology and the development of prescientific astronomy by eye, it was believed that the positions of stars and constellations defined the destiny of human beings; however, a practical approach transformed those data into useful interpretations and recommendations to guide sailors in their navigation. According to this approach, the universe is a stationary and eternal scenario explained in terms of mysterious agents and miraculous circumstances.

(2)	Optical telescopes enlarged and deepened what could be seen with the naked eye; afterwards what was observed, measured, and described in scientific terms was communicated and interpretated. Then, the universe was conceived as a complicated scenario dynamically active in expansion, composed of more complex celestial objects than planets, stars, or galaxies. It corresponded to a critical shift from philosophical speculations towards scientific explanations where the planet Earth was not central.

(3)	From the second half of the last century and so far, this one, specific signals have been captured, recorded, and analyzed corresponding to the emission, transport, and reception of electromagnetic radiations of more frequencies than those of visible light. These signals were produced by the arrival of neutrinos, or the interference effects generated by gravitational waves. New objects have been discovered such as pulsars, microwave background radiation, black holes, dark matter, dark energy, …. Nowadays this is called physical cosmology. 

### Evolution of physical cosmology.

Next we consider the evolution of physical cosmology based on the a conceptual breakdown description of the content of Peebles´ Physics Nobel Lecture *How Physical Cosmology Grew*. For identification purposes, we quote the beginning lines of each paragraph of the Lecture and assign a sequential number (Prg). All excerpts of the original text are in cursive format. Furthermore, in the majority of these excerpts we add a paragraph paragraphs called Comment which refers to information that belongs to the Lecture but it is not literally quoted; it  describes Peebles´s contributions, makes clear certain circumstances without going into details that will be explained in the Lecture, or indicates scientific knowledge accessible in that time. 

*Prg01: I began studying the large-scale nature of the universe in 1964, on the advice of Professor Robert Henry Dicke at Princeton University. Bob guided my doctoral dissertation and from then on, I counted on him as my professor of continuing education.* 

*Prg02: The usual thinking at the time was that the universe is homogeneous in the large-scale average, and that it is expanding and evolving as predicted by Einstein’s general theory of relativity.*

Comment: Reference to Peebles´s book Cosmology’s Century published in 2020. 

*Prg03: Cosmology became more interesting with the discovery that the universe is filled with a near uniform sea of microwave radiation with a thermal spectrum at a temperature of a few degrees Kelvin.*

Comment: Reference to the discovery of Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMB).

*Prg04: In 1964 Bob Dicke explained to three junior members of his Gravity Research Group, Peter Roll, David Wilkinson, and me, why he thought the universe might have expanded from a hot dense early condition.*

Comment: Reference to the suggestions made by Dicke: to Roll and Wilkinson for building a microwave radiometer and to Peebles for thinking about the theoretical implications of the results. 

*Prg05: Peter Roll went on to a career in education, putting computers into teaching laboratories.*

Comment: Reference to a photography of a radiometer used to obtain a map of the variations of the radiation intensity across the sky, as an attempt to identify the presence of the sea of microwave radiation.

*Prg06: The evidence I know is that the sea of microwave radiation was first detected in the late 1950s as unexpected excess noise in experiments in microwave communication at the Bell Telephone Laboratories.*

Comment: Reference to the experiments performed by Penzias and Wilson around 1964 and discussion of possible causes of the excess noise in the signal: originating in the instrument, coming from the surroundings or due to a sea of radiation from a hot early universe.

*Prg07: Bell Laboratories showed us in Princeton credible evidence that we are in a sea of microwave radiation, and that the radiation is close to uniform because the excess noise is close to the same wherever in the sky the antenna points. It proves to be what Dicke had suggested we look for, a fossil from the hot early stages of expansion of the universe.*

Comment: Reference to a question Why did the Nobel committee not name Dicke with Penzias and Wilson for the identification of this radiation?

*Prg08: At Bob Dicke’s suggestion I had been thinking about the significance of finding or not finding a sea of radiation. A negative result, a tight upper bound on the radiation temperature, would have suggested an interesting problem. …. So, I proposed a way out: postulate a sea of neutrinos with degeneracy energy large enough to have prevented electrons from combining with protons.*

Comment: Reference to a similar solution presented independently by Yakov Zel’dovich, as an example of what Robert Merton termed as “multiples in scientific discovery.”

*Prg09: I saw that a universe hot enough to have left a detectable sea of thermal radiation would have tended to leave the abundances of the elements in a mix characteristic of the rapid expansion and cooling of the early universe. In an unpublished preprint in late 1964, I estimated that a reasonable upper bound on the primeval helium abundance requires a lower bound on the CMB temperature*, $T_0≥ 10$ *K, in the absence of degeneracy.*

*Prg10: We might pause to review why I had a lower bound on* $T_0$. *During the course of expansion of the early universe, when the temperature fell through the critical value* $T_c ≥ 10^9$ *K, detailed balance would have switched from suppression of deuterons by photodissociation to accumulation by radiative capture.*

Comment: Reference to the amount of element production which is determined by the combination $ρ_b/T^3$, where $ρ_b$ is the present baryon mass density and $T$ is the temperature. Peebles´s calculation in 1964 of the bound on the CMB temperature resulted high by a factor of three.

*Prg11: After I had worked out these considerations I learned that George Gamow already presented the physics of element buildup in a hot big bang in two memorable papers published in 1948 (Gamow 1948a,b). Gamow had earlier proposed that the chemical elements were produced in the hot early stages of expansion of the universe by successive neutron captures, beta decays keeping the atomic nuclei in the valley of stability.*

Comment: Reference to the calculation made by Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman concerning the element abundances to be expected in Gamow´s picture and mention of a paper by Peebles in 2014. 

*Prg12: Following up an idea with a detailed computation was not Gamow’s style. But Fermi and Terkevich at the University of Chicago soon worked the first computation of the buildup of element abundances in a hot big bang using realistic nuclear reaction rates.*

Comment: Reference to a publication by Peebles in 1966 indicating that the predicted light isotope abundances coming out of a hot big bang could match the observations.

*Prg13: Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Zel’dovich knew Gamow’s ideas but thought they must be wrong because the theory predicts an unacceptably large primeval helium abundance.*

*Prg14: In the UK, Hoyle and Tayler (1964) knew the evidence that the helium abundance in old stars is large, and not inconsistent with Gamow’s (1948a, b) ideas.*

Comment: Reference to a publication by Hoyle and Tayler who in 1964 realized that Gamow’s theory predicted the presence of a sea of thermal radiation.

*Prg15: So, consider the situation in 1964. In the USSR, Zel’dovich thought Gamow’s hot big bang theory is wrong because it overpredicts the helium abundance….. In the USA, I did not know about Gamow yet, but I knew there was a chance of detecting fossil radiation from a hot big bang that made helium because the foreground at microwave frequencies looked likely to be small.*

Comment: Reference to the detection of microwave radiation of unknown origin made by Penzias and Wilson.
 
*Prg16: Yet another multiple was the recognition of the role of the sea of thermal radiation in the gravitational growth of the galaxies, independently by Gamow, Zel’dovich and his group, and me. I hit on what might be a singleton, the analysis of the effect of the dynamical interaction of matter and radiation in a hot big bang cosmology (in Peebles 1965 and many later papers).*

Comment: Reference to a publication by Peebles and Yu: they obtained in 1970 the numerical solutions of the effects of the baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) on the distributions of matter and radiation.

*Prg17: It took some time to connect BAO theory to observations of the effect in the distributions of matter and radiation. The BAO effect in the angular distribution of the CMB was discovered and well measured at the turn of the century, and at the time there was a hint of detection in the galaxy space distribution (as reviewed in Peebles 2020).*

Comment: Reference to the prediction by Peebles in 1981 of a bump in the Fourier transform of the matter power spectrum. Calculations in 2005 have shown a smaller effect of the bump because the nonbaryonic dark matter weakens the BAO effect.

*Prg18: For most of the time between BAO theory and observation it was not at all clear to me that there would be a detection. The BAO theory assumes standard physics, including the general theory of relativity. That is an extrapolation from the tests in the solar system and smaller, on scales* $≥ 10^{13}$ *cm, to the scales of cosmology* $≥ 10^{28}$ *cm. ….. The theory also assumes cosmic structure grew out of departures from homogeneity associated with small near scale-invariant spacetime curvature fluctuations.*

*Prg19: This uncertain situation was resolved in 1990 by two brilliant experiments, one carried by the USA NASA satellite COBE, the other by the Canadian University of British Columbia rocket COBRA. Both established that the spectrum is very close to thermal* 

*Prg20: Prior to the demonstration that the CMB spectrum is wonderfully close to thermal I had to consider the possibility that there is a real and substantial departure from that equilibrium condition. The interpretation would be messy. I didn’t want to think about it, so while awaiting clarification of the spectrum measurements I turned to another program, statistical measures of the galaxy distribution and motions relative to the mean homogeneous expansion of the universe.*

Comment: Reference to the process of counting galaxies in small cells in the sky, logging some one million galaxies by scanning photographic plates with a traveling microscope and afterwards converting to data suitable for computation of statistical measures.

*Prg21: Since I like images, I was pleased with the map we made of the largescale galaxy distribution.*

*Prg22: The Lick and other catalogs are compilations of galaxy angular positions with approximate distances. The statistical measures I used are N-point position correlation functions and their Fourier or spherical harmonic transforms.*

Comment: Reference to Peebles book The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe published in 1980. 

*Prg23: Why did I devote so much effort to this program? I enjoy this kind of analysis. And I had the vague feeling that the results might offer a hint to how the galaxies and their clumpy space distribution got to be the way they are.*

*Prg24: By 1980 it had become clear that the sea of microwave radiation is far smoother than the space distribution of the galaxies. But the mass concentrations in galaxies and groups and clusters of galaxies were supposed to have grown by gravity out of the initially close to homogeneous early universe of the hot big bang theory…. So why is the CMB so smooth? In yet another of Merton’s multiples, I and Zel’dovich’s group in the USSR independently guessed the answer: Suppose the baryonic matter that stars and planets and people are made of is only a trace element, and that most matter is dark and interacts weakly if at all with radiation and our type of baryonic matter.*

Comment:  Reference to Peebles concern about the existence of nonbaryonic matter and that the relativistic prediction of the gravitational disturbance to the radiation could be produced by the departure from a homogeneous mass distribution. 

*Prg25: The model I put together from these pieces predicts that the disturbance to the CMB caused by the formation of the observed matter distribution would cause the CMB temperature to vary across the sky by a few parts per million. That is much less than the upper bounds from the CMB anisotropy measurements we had when I published this prediction in Peebles (1982). The CMB anisotropy was detected some 15 years later and found to agree with my computation within the modest uncertainties.*

*Prg26: The new form of matter in my 1982 proposal became known cold dark matter, or CDM, the “cold” meaning the dark matter pressure in the early universes was small enough not to have excessively smoothed the primeval mass distribution. I added the assumption that general relativity survives the immense extrapolation to the scales of cosmology, and that mass concentrations grew out of primeval spacetime curvature fluctuations.*

*Prg27: There was a remarkable multiple in 1977. Five groups, independently as far as I can tell, introduced the idea of a new class of neutrinos with rest mass* $~ 3 G_eV$. *They became known as WIMPs, for weakly interacting massive particles….. Yet the WIMP idea appeared not long after the astronomers had good evidence of subluminal mass around galaxies, and not long before I needed nonbaryonic cold dark matter to account for the smoothness of the CMB.*

*Prg28: My 1982 CDM cosmology was greeted with more enthusiasm than I felt it warranted because I could think of other models that would equally well fit what we knew then…. In particular, my 1982 paper assumed for simplicity that the universe is expanding at escape velocity, but by that time I already knew what I considered to be reasonably good evidence that the expansion is faster than that.*

*Prg29: Expansion at escape velocity, in the relativistic Einstein-de Sitter cosmological model that assumes space curvature and Einstein’s cosmological constant may be ignored, would mean that whenever we happened to flourish and take an interest in the expanding universe, we would find that the rate of expansion is at escape velocity.*

Comment: Reference to a publication of Davis and Peebles in 1983 where they analyze data related to the measurements of galaxy redshifts.

*Prg30: These redshift data yielded a probe of the relative motions of the galaxies. That gave a measure of galaxy masses, which indicated that the mean mass density is less than required for escape velocity. … Davis and I found consistent galaxy mass estimates from the relative motions of galaxies over a range of a factor of ten in separation.*  

*Prg31: From the early 1980s through the mid-1990s I played the role of Cassandra, emphasizing the growing evidence that the universe is expanding faster than escape velocity to people who for the most part would rather not think about it.*
	
*Prg32: In 1984 I introduced the accommodation to the low mass density that proves to work: add Einstein’s cosmological constant, Λ (Peebles 1984), in what became known as the ΛCDM theory. … Anyway, I think I was the first to present actual computations of the effect of adding Λ.*
	
*Prg33: In the years around the mid-1990s I again acted in my self-appointed role of Cassandra, because I was not at all confident that the ΛCDM theory is a good approximation. The tests were not yet all that tight, and I could think of other models that fit the data about as well. In the late 1990s I was finishing my latest and maybe most elegant alternative to ΛCDM when I learned that the CMB anisotropy measurements revealed features characteristic of the theory Jer Ju and I had worked out a quarter century earlier.*

*Prg34: I remain surprised and impressed at how well ΛCDM passes ever more demanding tests. But I continue to hope that challenges to ΛCDM will be found and help guide us to a still better more complete theory.* 

*Prg35: I have written four books on the state of research in cosmology. I meant the title of the first, Physical Cosmology, to indicate that I did not intend to get into the subtleties of what might be termed astronomical cosmology: evidence from stellar evolution ages and the extragalactic distance scale.*

Comment: Reference to Weinberg book Gravitation and Cosmology published in 1972.

*Prg36: My second book on cosmology, The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe, published in 1980, is a sort of catalog of the statistical measures I had devised and applied, the methods of analyses of how these measures might be expected to have evolved in an expanding universe, and the observational consequences of the evolution…. Writing this book helped me introduce what came to be known as the Cold Dark Matter cosmological model, in 1982*.

*Prg37: My third book, Principles of Physical Cosmology, is much larger than the second, which in turn is much larger than the first. This one was published in 1993, at about the end of the time when it was practical to aim to present in one volume a reasonably complete assessment of the state of research in the physical science of cosmology…. Research in cosmology in the mid-1990s was an active turmoil of multiple ideas and promising-looking but confusing results from model fits to measurements in progress. That situation quite abruptly changed at the end of the decade, when research converged on a well-tested standard model, the ΛCDM cosmology.*

*Prg38: The convergence was driven by three great observational programs: the tight measurement of the redshift-magnitude relation that reveals the departure from the linear low redshift limit; the precision measurement of the cosmic microwave radiation anisotropy spectrum and the measurement of the cosmic mean mass density. … I have once again given in to the impulse to write a book. This one, Cosmology’s Century, describes how these three programs, with other results from brilliant ideas and elegant experiments, along with the wrong turns taken and opportunities missed, got us to a welltested cosmology (Peebles 2020).*

*Prg39: The establishment of cosmology is a considerable extension of the reach of well-tested physical science, and the story is simple enough that it offers a good illustration of the ways of physical science. ….  And I picture the broad general advance of physical science as a spreading wave that touches many and might be expected to trigger any particular idea more than once, apparently independently.*

*Prg40: Meanwhile, let us not forget the great lesson that the established social constructions of science are buttressed by rich and deep webs of evidence. Surely there is a better more complete cosmology than ΛCDM. But we may be confident that the better theory will predict a universe that is a lot like ΛCDM, with something analogous to its cosmological constant and dark matter, because the universe has been examined from many sides now and found to look a lot like ΛCDM.*

*Prg41: I confess to having been unhappy with the Nobel Prize Committee for not recognizing Bob Dicke’s deep influence in the development of gravity physics and cosmology. The committee had their reasons, of course; their considerations can be complicated. But I am satisfied now because my Nobel Prize is closure of what Bob set in motion, his great goal of establishing an empirically based gravity physics, by the establishment of the empirically based relativistic cosmology.*

In what follows we apply the contextualization of learning procedure to Peebles´s Nobel Lecture whose content has been previously breakdown in paragraphs. Firstly, in Step 1 we present the generative questions corresponding to the problematic situation and propose some specific answers (Ans) for each question. Then in Step 2, each specific answer (Ans) is described in terms of an appropriate selection of paragraphs (Prg). However, instead of inserting the full content of each paragraph we replace them by short descriptive sentences. The content of all these answers and paragraphs comes from Peebles´s Nobel Lecture. 

**Step 1**

Problematic situation: According to his Nobel Lecture *How Physical Cosmology Grew*, what is the meaning and content of Physical Cosmology?

GQ1: What are three of the main issues that describe the research life of James Peebles?

Ans1.1. Role of Robert Dicke.

Ans1.2. Opinions on cosmology and science.

Ans1.3. Publication of books.

GQ2: What is the cosmic microwave background radiation?

Ans2.1. Gamow´s hot big bang theory.

Ans2.2. Discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation.

Ans2.3. Space distribution of galaxies.

GQ3: What is dark matter?

Ans3.1. Accelerated expansion of the universe.

Ans3.2. On cold dark matter.

**Step 2**

GQ1: What are three of the main issues that describe the research life of James Peables?

Ans1.1. Role of Robert Dicke.

Prg01: Doctoral dissertation under the advice of Dicke.

Prg04: Roll, Wilkinson and Peebles are integrated into the Gravity Research Group in 1964.

Prg08: Dicke suggests thinking on the significance of the existence of the microwave radiation.

Prg41: *I have been unhappy with the Nobel Prize Committee for not recognizing Bob Dicke’s deep influence in the development of gravity physics and cosmology.*

Ans1.2. Opinions on cosmology and science.

Prg39: *Establishment of cosmology is a considerable extension of the reach of well-tested physical science; it offers a good illustration of the ways of physical science.*

Prg40: *The established social constructions of science are buttressed by rich and deep webs of evidence.*

Ans1.3. Publication of books.

Prg35: Reference to his first book *Physical Cosmology* (published in 1971). 

Prg36: Reference to his second book *The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe* (published in 1980).

Prg37: Reference to his third book, *Principles of Physical Cosmology* (published in 1993).

Prg02: Reference to his fourth book, *Cosmology´s Century* (published in 2020).

GQ2: What is the cosmic microwave background radiation?

Ans2.1. Gamow´s hot big bang theory.

Prg10: Publications by George Gamow about a hot big bang process.

Prg11: Fermi and Terkevich made the first computation of the buildup of element abundances in a hot big bang process.

Prg12: In the Soviet Union, Zel’dovich was aware of Gamow’s ideas.

Prg13: In 1964 in the UK, Hoyle and Tayler knew the evidence that the helium abundance in old stars is large. 

Prg14: In 1964. in the USSR, Zel’dovich thought Gamow’s hot big bang theory was wrong because it overpredicted helium abundance.

Prg15: The role of the sea of thermal radiation in the gravitational growth of the galaxies was recognized independently by Gamow, Zel’dovich and Peebles.

Ans2.2. Discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation.

Prg03: The cosmic microwave background radiation.

Prg05: Experiments that show a departure from exact isotropy in the microwave radiation.

Prg06: Evidence that the microwave radiation was detected in 1950.

Prg07: Bell Laboratories shows to Princeton Gravity Research Group that the radiation is close to be uniform.

Prg09: Recognition that the early universe had a rapid expansion and cooling.

Prg18: Consideration of the possibility for a real and substantial departure from the equilibrium condition in the cosmic microwave background radiation.

Prg25: Prediction of the variation in the temperature of the microwave radiation caused by the observed matter distribution.

Ans2.3. Space distribution of galaxies.

Prg19: Advantages of having a map made of the largescale galaxy distribution.

Prg20: The Lick and other catalogs are compilations of galaxy angular positions with approximate distances.

Prg21: Implications of the results concerning the space distribution of galaxies.

Prg22: By 1980 it had become clear that the sea of microwave radiation was far smoother than the space distribution of the galaxies.

Prg24: The rapid motions of neutrinos in the early stages of the expansion of the universe would have smoothed the primeval mass distribution of clusters of galaxies.

Prg27: Five groups in 1977 independently introduced the idea of a new class of neutrinos known as WIMPs, for weakly interacting massive particles.

Prg30: Redshift data yielded a probe of the relative motions of the galaxies as an indication that mass density is less than that required for escape velocity.

GQ3: What is dark matter?

Ans3.1. Accelerated expansion of the universe.

Prg29: In the relativistic Einstein-de Sitter cosmological model the rate of expansion of the universe is at escape velocity.

Prg31: Emphasis on the growing evidence that the universe was expanding faster than escape velocity.

Prg32: Introduction of Einstein’s cosmological constant Λ in what became known as the ΛCDM theory.

Prg33: Indication of lack of confidence that the ΛCDM theory was a good approximation and attempts to find other models that fit the data about as well.

Prg34: Surprise at how well ΛCDM passes ever more demanding tests. 

Prg38: Consideration that the results of great observational programs provided evidence that the ΛCDM cosmology was a well-tested standard model,

Ans3.2. On cold dark matter.

Prg16: Connection of the BAO theory (baryon acoustic oscillations) with observations of the distributions of matter and radiation.

Prg17: Assumption that the BAO theory is standard physics and includes the general theory of relativity. 

Prg23: Consideration that most matter is dark and interacts weakly with radiation and baryonic matter.

Prg26: Proposition of a new form of matter to be called cold dark matter. 

Prg28: Good reception of cold dark matter cosmology.	

### References to Nobel Prize documents (NP).

**Stars, pulsars and black holes.**

**NP1967:** *Award ceremony speech.*

MLA style: Award ceremony speech. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1967/ceremony-speech/

MLA style: Speed read: Stellar Nuclear Reactors. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sun. 20 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1967/speedread/

MLA style: Hans Bethe – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1967/bethe/facts/>

MLA style: Hans Bethe – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1967/bethe/lecture/>

**NP1983:** *Prize presentation.*

MLA style: Subramanyan Chandrasekhar – Prize presentation. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1983/chandrasekhar/prize-presentation/>

MLA style: Subramanyan Chandrasekhar – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1983/chandrasekhar/facts/

MLA style: Subramanyan Chandrasekhar – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1983/chandrasekhar/lecture/

MLA style: William A. Fowler – Prize presentation. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1983/fowler/prize-presentation/> 

MLA style: William A. Fowler – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1983/fowler/facts/>

MLA style: William A. Fowler – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1983/fowler/lecture/>

**NP1974:** *Press release.*

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1974/press-release/>

MLA style: Martin Ryle – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1974/ryle/facts/

MLA style: Martin Ryle – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1974/ryle/lecture/>

MLA style: Antony Hewish – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1974/hewish/facts/

MLA style: Antony Hewish – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1974/hewish/lecture/>

**NP1993:** *Press release.*

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1993/press-release/

MLA style: Russell A. Hulse – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1993/hulse/facts/

MLA style: Russell A. Hulse – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1993/hulse/lecture/

MLA style: Joseph H. Taylor Jr. – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1993/taylor/facts/

MLA style: Joseph H. Taylor Jr. – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1993/taylor/lecture/>

**NP2020:** *Popular information.*

MLA style: Popular information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/popular-information/

MLA style: Roger Penrose – Facts – 2020. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/penrose/facts/

MLA style: Roger Penrose – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/penrose/lecture/

MLA style: Reinhard Genzel – Facts – 2020. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/genzel/facts/

MLA style: Reinhard Genzel – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/genzel/lecture/

MLA style: Andrea Ghez – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/ghez/lecture/>

**Neutrinos.**

**NP1995:*** Press release.*

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1995/press-release/

MLA style: Award ceremony speech. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Wed. 23 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1995/ceremony-speech/

MLA style: Advanced information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Wed. 23 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1995/advanced-information/>

MLA style: Frederick Reines – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1995/reines/facts/

MLA style: Frederick Reines – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1995/reines/lecture/>

**NP2002:** *Speed read.*

MLA style: Speed read: Mining Mysterious Particles & X-ray Vision of the Universe. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/speedread/

MLA style: Popular information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/popular-information/>

MLA style: Raymond Davis Jr. – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/davis/facts/

MLA style: Raymond Davis Jr. – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/davis/lecture/

MLA style: Masatoshi Koshiba – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/koshiba/facts/

MLA style: Masatoshi Koshiba – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/koshiba/lecture/>

MLA style: Riccardo Giacconi – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/giacconi/facts/

MLA style: Riccardo Giacconi – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2002/giacconi/lecture/>

**NP2015:** *Popular information.*

MLA style: Popular information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2015/popular-information/

MLA style: Advanced information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Fri. 30 Jun 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2015/advanced-information/

MLA style: Takaaki Kajita – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2015/kajita/facts/>

MLA style: Takaaki Kajita – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2015/kajita/lecture/

MLA style: Arthur B. McDonald – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2015/mcdonald/facts/

MLA style: Arthur B. McDonald – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2015/mcdonald/lecture/>
	
**Radiation.**

**NP1978:** *Press release.*

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1978/press-release/

MLA style: Speed read: Tuning in to Big Bang’s Echo. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sat. 26 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1978/speedread/>

MLA style: Arno Penzias – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1978/penzias/facts/>

MLA style: Arno Penzias – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1978/penzias/lecture/

MLA style: Robert Woodrow Wilson – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1978/wilson/lecture/>

**NP2006:** *Popular information.*

MLA style: Popular information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/popular-information/>

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sat. 26 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/press-release/

MLA style: Speed read: By Dawn’s Early Light. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sat. 26 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/speedread/

MLA style: John C. Mather – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/mather/facts/

MLA style: John C. Mather – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/mather/lecture/

MLA style: George F. Smoot – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/smoot/facts/

MLA style: George F. Smoot – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2006/smoot/lecture/>

**NP2011:** *Popular information.*

MLA style: Popular Information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2011/popular-information/>

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sat. 26 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2011/press-release/

MLA style: Saul Perlmutter – Facts. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2011/perlmutter/facts/

MLA style: Saul Perlmutter – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2011/perlmutter/lecture/

MLA style: Brian P. Schmidt – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2011/schmidt/lecture/

MLA style: Adam G. Riess – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Mon. 14 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2011/riess/lecture/>

**NP2019:** *Popular information.*

MLA style: Popular information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/popular-information/

MLA style: Press release. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sun. 27 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/press-release/

MLA style: Award ceremony speech. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Sun. 27 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/ceremony-speech/

MLA style: Advanced information. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 29 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/advanced-information/

MLA style: James Peebles – Facts – 2019. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/peebles/facts/

MLA style: James Peebles – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/peebles/lecture/

MLA style: Michel Mayor – Facts – 2019. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/mayor/facts/

MLA style: Michel Mayor – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/mayor/lecture/

MLA style: Didier Queloz – Nobel Lecture. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 15 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2019/queloz/lecture/>




